General idea:
Identify the topics within an article. The topics are extracted from
a thrid party corpus like Wikipedia under supervision and is thus
more reliable.

Task decomposition:
1. To perform a topic identification, we need a model for each topic.
   We want to start with ESA model by Gabrilovich and Markovitch. It
   is basically tf-idf model for each article in Wikipedia. And each
   article is a topic.
   Brown clusters by Peter F. Brown may also be a good choice.

   If we have time, we may also introduce more complicated models such
   as a topic with sentimental denotation.

2. With topic models, we still need a strategy to extract the topics
   from an article. We want to something similar to object identification
   in an image.
   We will develop an algorithm similar to selective search by Uijlings
   on text. We will start with each sentence as our initial regions.
   The idea is to use heirarchical clustering as the basis for an overall
   topic model.

   We could also consider using GloVe vectors for words and clustering
   words based on cosine similarity.

3. For evaluation, we will use the extracted topics as input features for
   later tasks. For example, we may use it for document classification.
   There are many document classification data sets available for
   comparison including AthR, XGraph, and BbCrypt.

Questions:
1. Any similar previous works?
2. Any pit falls? Anything that is obvious troublesome?
3. Any better evaluation methods? Do we have to rely on a third task?
4. If it does not work on the classification task we chose, what shall
   we do? Failure on one task doesn't really mean a failure right? How
   do we actually know is this method useful or not?


Some potentially related work:

1. Peter Young, Alice Lai, Micah Hodosh, Julia Hockenmaier. From image descriptions to visual denotations: New similarity metrics for semantic inference over event descriptions. ACL '14.
   - Mapping sentences to images using hypernyms, word vector similarity and composition of word vectors in sentences.
2. Sida Wang and Christopher D. Manning. Baselines and bigrams: Simple, good sentiment and topic classification. ACL '12.
   - Various topic classification & sentiment analysis ideas & data sets.
3. Qi Sun, et al. Text segmentation with LDA-based Fisher kernel. ACL '08.
   - An approach to extending LDA to segment a document into discrete topic sections.
4. Eric H. Huang, Richard Socher, Christopher D. Manning, and Andrew Y. Ng. 2012. Improving word representations via global context and multiple word prototypes. ACL '12.
   - Vector space model comparable w/ GloVe, but also a potentially interesting contextual dataset.
